The real resistance to Donald Trump begins at 8 pm Eastern on January 31, 2017 when Mr. Trump announces his nomination to fill what many believe is Merrick Garland’s seat on The Supreme Court.

And if The Democratic Party is to have any legitimacy as “The Opposition Party” they must join this resistance.

And if the 48 individual Senate Members of The Democratic Party are to have any legitimacy as Democrats, they too must individually join this resistance

This means one thing, and one thing only.

At least 41 of the 48 Democratic Senators must filibuster Donald Trump’s nominee for The Supreme Court unless that nominee represents the values and positions and dreams of the majority of the American people.

If not, Democrats across the country must rise up between now and the Democratic Primaries in early 2018 and find, and fund Senate Democratic challengers who will.

Any and every Democratic Senator who caves and gives in to Donald Trump and to an “out of the mainstream” Supreme Court nominee (who could serve for 20 or 30 or more years) must be vigorously and apologetically “Primaried” regardless of how red their state is or how many “angry Trump voters” there may be in their state.  These Trump voters are not going to vote for them anyway and the brilliant political strategy of trying to appeal to them instead of boldly championing women’s rights, civil rights, environmental rights and other core Progressive values and principles is the reason Democrats keep losing in the first place.

Marches have impact. Rallies have impact.  Protests and videos and phone calls and emails have impact.

But 41 Democrats in The United States Senate can accomplish what millions marched into the streets for on January 21, what thousands protest for at airports across the country now and, most importantly, what 73,648,823 Americans voted for, and against, on November 8, 2016.

Donald Trump was destroyed in The 2016 Presidential Election.

There was a landslide all right.  Against him!

10,669,187 more voters voted for Hillary Clinton, Jill Stein, Gary Johnson and the other candidates than voted for Donald Trump, far in excess of the oft quoted 2.9 Million more that voted for Hillary. In fact, Donald Trump only received the vote of 27.2% of eligible voters and 19.4% of the US population and his current approval ratings confirm his historically shocking minority support.

The only reason Trump is in The Oval Office is because 76,588 voters, out of 136,628,459, in three states, voted for him, i.e., a minuscule 0.056% of the total voters.

Bottom line, Donald Trump is “A Minority President” and deserves to be treated as such, and there is only one thing that can - with absolute certainty - reflect this minority support and stop him in his tracks.

And that one thing is The Senate Filibuster - the same tool that Minority, now Majority Leader Mitch McConnell used, virtually non-stop, to thwart almost everything President Barack Obama wanted to do for 8 years.

If Democrats filibuster Donald Trump’s nominee, McConnell, now on the other side of the filibuster, will have to find 60 Senators to end that filibuster in a procedure called “cloture”.  But McConnell only has 52 total Republicans. He and Donald Trump will need to peel away 8 Senate Democrats to end the filibuster and move to a vote to confirm the nominee.

What that means is that if only 41 of the 48 Senate Democrats vote against cloture and to continue the filibuster, then Trump’s pick does not get confirmed.

Democrats just need 41 Senators to stand up to Donald Trump and defeat his nominee, and him, and send a message that if he wants to fill the empty seat, “The Merrick Garland Seat” on The Supreme Court, Donald Trump must nominate someone who supports women’s rights, gay rights, civil rights, environmental rights and wants, like the vast majority of American citizens, to undo “Citizens United”.

So here’s the list of the 48 Democrats and the 52 Republican United States Senators, by state.  If you marched in The Women’s March, if you want to protest, if you want to stop Donald Trump and his agenda then find your two Senators, call them and tell them to stand up against Donald Trump . . . or that you won’t be voting for them in 2018, or 2020 or 2022!

Yes, Donald Trump has vowed to destroy the filibuster if Democrats deign to oppose his Supreme Court pick, but this is the kind of fearful, timid, reactive thinking that has all but destroyed the Democratic brand.

We gain nothing by allowing Trump and Republicans to intimidate the country in this way.

I say, bring it on.  For two reasons.

First of all, it is not a certainty that Republicans will, indeed, “nuke” the filibuster.  They need 50 of their 52 Senate members and it is unlikely that experienced members like John McCain, Lindsey Graham, Susan Collins or Lisa Murkowski and Trump critics like Jeff Flake or Ben Sasse will go along with the destruction of historic minority rights in The Senate.  They understand that “what goes around comes around” and that, one day, they will again be in the minority.  This hard reality kept 53 Democrats from eliminating the filibuster for Supreme Court Justices when they voted to reform the procedure in 2013.

Secondly, America would understand that eliminating this last check on one-party control creates the threat of a very real anti-democratic, authoritarian, Donald Trump led tyrannical regime and that the only way to reverse this and re-install critical checks and balances to America would be for the country to come together to defeat Republican Senators and return Democrats to control of The United States Senate.

102.7 Million eligible voters did not vote in The 2016 Election.  My bet is that a large percentage of these non-voters will come out of the electoral shadows to defeat Senate Republicans in 2018 if, in support of a wildly unpopular President, they “nuke” democracy on their watch!
