After a meeting with the top Republicans on Capitol Hill Thursday to discuss the agenda ahead, President-elect Donald Trump laid out his top three priorities: immigration, health care and jobs.

"We're gonna look very strongly at immigration; we're gonna look at the border. We're gonna look very strongly at health care, and we're looking at jobs — big league jobs," Trump told a throng of reporters after a meeting with Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell in the lawmaker's second-floor Capitol Hill office.

While Trump mentioned the border being a top priority within the realm of immigration, he did not specifically mention the construction of a physical wall, something that he campaigned heavily on. Such a wall, however, is estimated to cost tens of billions of dollars.

"We have a lot of priorities, a lot of really great priorities," Trump added. "People are gonna be very, very happy."

Trump was asked if he would ask Congress to ban Muslims from entering the country, a proposal Trump floated on the campaign trail. But Trump ignored the question, said "thank you, everybody" and walked away.

After a temporary removal of his Muslim ban from his website, it is now back on it, reported the Washington Post.

The new website for his transition, GreatAgain.gov, however, doesn't include a Muslim ban per se, but calls for the suspension of "the issuance of visas to any place where adequate screening cannot occur."

Trump's meeting with McConnell lasted about an hour and was superseded by a lunch between Trump, Vice-President-Elect Mike Pence, incoming first lady Melania Trump and House Speaker Paul Ryan at the Republican Party's Capitol Hill Club, a private club used for meetings and fundraisers.

With Trump by his side, Ryan congratulated Trump on "one of the most impressive victories we've ever seen."

"We're gonna turn that victory into progress for the American people, and we are now talking about how we are going to hit the ground running to make sure that we can get this country turned around and make American great again," Ryan added.

Ryan also showed Trump where his inauguration will take place from the Speakers Balcony, a spacious balcony on the second floor of the Capitol outside of Ryan's office overlooking the National Mall.

Ryan, McConnell and Trump have had a complicated relationship throughout the campaign season. Ryan distanced himself from Trump but maintained a weak endorsement of the Republican nominee. McConnell also carefully navigated the Trump candidacy, going weeks without responding to reporters' questions about Trump's controversial statements.

Ryan and McConnell also have policy differences with Trump. The congressional leaders are more supportive of free trade and reforming and shrinking old-age benefits of Social Security and Medicare.

"It was a first-class meeting," McConnell told reporters after Trump had left the building Thursday.
