KALLSTADT, Germany — A house that once belonged to Donald Trump’s grandfather in a sleepy German wine village is apparently up for sale.

But the present owners aren't looking to cash in on the fame of America’s president-elect. They're just tired of all the media attention.

Friedrich Trump, the president-elect's grandfather, left his home in Kallstadt seeking a better life in the United States in 1885.

A sign on the white dwelling's blue door reads: “We’re offering this object of historical interest to the Kallstadt municipality for a fair price. So we can live in our house without press and media hype!!!!”

According to local media reports, journalists have even flown drones over the property, which is located on a quiet side street.

Residents of Trump’s ancestral hometown have felt overwhelmed by the crush of journalists from near and far looking for reactions to his stunning victory.

“The first reporters were knocking on doors and windows at 6 a.m. on Thursday," an elderly woman, who only agreed to be interviewed on the condition of anonymity, told NBC News. "It is just too much."

Asked whether the village is looking forward to a potential visit by the future President Trump, many residents were quick to say, “Nein, danke,” or “No, thank you."

“Kallstadt will become a bit more known across Germany, but we will continue to mind our own business,” local resident Walter Burre said in an interview with German broadcaster ZDF.

Kallstadt is nestled between colorful vineyards about a one-hour drive from Frankfurt.

But locals say that rather than promoting their connection to the Trump family, they will continue to focus on advertising the culinary attractions of the region, including their wine and a famous sausage product called “pig stomach.”

“I don’t think American tourists will come to Kallstadt to buy our delicacies, so why bother,” said a sales person at the local butcher shop, which advertises the village and store as “pig stomach paradise.”

Joerg Doerr, head of tourist information in Kallstadt, expects more English-speaking tourists to visit in the future.

However, many locals are taking a wait-and-see approach about how Trump behaves once he takes office.

“Not all publicity is good publicity,” Doerr told Germany’s Bild newspaper.
