

Ed Rollins on why Trump should avoid appointing governors to his administration

(ROLLINS) What happens with governors, whereas John Sununu is Chief of Staff at the White House or some of the others that have done this, Christie Whiteman is another example, a governor I helped elect, she goes to the EPA and basically fails miserably, goes out the day after she gets fired or put out to pasture and badmouths the hell out of the administration on the Today Show. Governors are used to being in charge.

Rollins on Dr. Ben Carson becoming a part of Trump's administration

(ROLLINS) What I would hope and I have great respect for the good doctor, but is he capable as a brain surgeon to run one of the largest agencies in government? Is he not better to be an advisor on healthcare, what have you, in the White House or somewhere else?

Rollins on Senator Sessions being in Trump's administration

(ROLLINS) You give him what he wants. He is an extraordinary talent, he has been very loyal, he is a very, very smart guy. He basically gave great council....in my sense someone in the foreign affairs area, defense area, Homeland Security, there is a whole bunch of things he can do...he is definitely someone I would put in my cabinet.

Rollins on Rudy Giuliani being a part of Trump's cabinet

(ROLLINS) Another one I would put in my cabinet is Rudy Giuliani, who is also very loyal for this reason, Rudy was basically the #3 guy in the Justice Department in the Reagan Administration. Cold have been the Attorney General had he stayed in the Reagan Administration but he became mayor.... The good thing about Rudy is he knows the justice system...my sense is he can fix it, he is a good law and order guy and very, very loyal.

Rollins on Newt Gingrich being a part of Trump's cabinet

(ROLLINS) My sense is Newt Gingrich and others are good guys but kind of the old school and again, you want people to be subservient to Trump, you want them to be good advisors, you don't want them to have their own agenda. The worst thing in the world is put Newt Gingrich on an airplane, make him Secretary of State...he would be conducting his own foreign policy and that's not what you want. You want someone who will basically help Trump develop his foreign policy and make sure Trump is always the man in charge.

Ed Rollins, GOP political consultant, former assistant to President Ronald Reagan & Co-Chairman of the pro- Donald Trump Super Pac "Great America", called into Kilmeade & Friends to give his expert insight on who he hopes President-elect Donald Trump will put in his administration and some of the people he should avoid appointing. Rollins feels it would be in the best interest of Mr. Trump to stay away from appointing governors and others, such as Newt Gingrich, to his administration because they will have their own agenda and not be 100% loyal to Mr. Trump.
