Russian President Vladimir Putin was one of the first world leaders to congratulate Republican leader Donald Trump on his election as the 45th president of the United States.

The Kremlin said Putin sent Trump a telegram of congratulation, expressing "his hope to work together for removing Russian-American relations from their crisis state".

In the aftermath of a hard-fought and often divisive campaign, it is worth recalling and reaffirming that the unity in diversity of the United States is one of the country's greatest strengths. I encourage all Americans to stay true to that spirit

Ban Ki-moon, the UN chief

The Russian leader said Moscow was ready to try to restore good relations with the US but added that it must be "based on principles of equality, mutual respect and a real accounting each other's positions".

Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas said in a statement that he "congratulates the elected American president, Donald Trump, and hopes that peace will be achieved during his term".

An Abbas aide, Saeb Erekat, said on Wednesday that he did not expect US positions on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to change under Trump.

Erekat said the Republican and Democratic parties were both committed to a two-state solution of the conflict and "I think this will not change with the coming administration".

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu congratulated the billionaire businessman on his elevation to the White House, calling him a "true friend of the State of Israel".

"President-elect Trump is a true friend of the State of Israel ... I am confident that president-elect Trump and I will continue to strengthen the unique alliance between our two countries and bring it to ever greater heights," he said.

United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said he hoped the administration of Trump will "strengthen the bonds of international cooperation" and described Hillary Clinton as "a powerful symbol of women's empowerment".

"In the aftermath of a hard-fought and often divisive campaign, it is worth recalling and reaffirming that the unity in diversity of the United States is one of the country's greatest strengths. I encourage all Americans to stay true to that spirit."

Major world leaders, many of whom had publicly criticised Trump in the run-up to election day, have lined up to express their wish to work with him.

Here are some more reaction from around the world:

NATO

NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg said he was looking forward to working with the US president-elect and that US leadership was vital to the world's biggest military alliance.

Stoltenberg said on Wednesday that "it is important that the Transatlantic bond remains strong" and that "US leadership is as important as ever".

"US leadership is as important as ever ... I look forward to working with president-elect Trump."

The European Union

European Union leaders have invited Trump to visit the 28-nation bloc to assess transatlantic ties.

With "sincere congratulations," EU Council President Donald Tusk and his Commission counterpart Jean-Claude Juncker said that, despite Trump's campaign talk of protectionism and isolationism, both sides "should consolidate the bridges we have been building across the Atlantic."

The EU's foreign policy chief said that ties with the US go beyond the election of Trump.

Federica Mogherini said on Wednesday on Twitter that "EU-US ties are deeper than any change in politics. We'll continue to work together, rediscovering the strength of Europe."

Germany

German Chancellor Angela Merkel has offered President-elect Trump "close cooperation" on the basis of shared values that she said included respect for human dignity regardless of people's origin, gender or religion.

READ MORE: Mixed reaction to Trump from prominent Muslim Americans
"Germany and America are connected by values: democracy, freedom, respect for the law and for the dignity of human beings, independently of origin, skin colour, religion, gender, sexual orientation or political views."

France

French President Francois Hollande said the election "opens a period of uncertainty".

Hollande said "certain positions taken by Donald Trump during the American campaign must be confronted with the values and interests we share with the United States".

The French leader had openly endorsed Hillary Clinton.

"What is at stake is peace, the fight against terrorism, the situation in the Middle East. It is economic relations and the preservation of the planet," he said.

Iran

Iran's semi-official news agency Tasnim quoted the country's foreign minister as saying that the US needed to implement its part of multilateral international commitments under last year's historic nuclear deal.


Mexicans react to Trump winning US election
During the campaign, Trump had criticised the deal and suggested that he would try to renegotiate it.

Mohammad Javad Zarif was quoted as saying that any US president "should have a correct understanding of realities of the world and our region and face them realistically".

Canada

"We look forward to working very closely with President-elect Trump, his administration, and with the United States Congress in the years ahead," Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said.

The Taliban

The Taliban armed group called on Trump to withdraw all US forces from Afghanistan once he takes office as president.

In a statement sent to The Associated Press new agency, Afghan Taliban spokesman Zabihullah Mujahid said that a Trump administration "should allow Afghans to become a free nation and have relationships with other countries based on non-interference in each other's affairs".

READ MORE: Shock for DC millennials as Trump wins US election
The Afghan conflict is in its 16th year. The Taliban have spread their footprint across Afghanistan in the two years since most international combat troops withdrew.

Turkey

Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan said he hoped that the Republican leader's election as president marked a new era in the US that he hoped would lead to "beneficial" steps for fundamental rights, liberties and democracy in the world.

"Personally and on behalf of the nation, I wish to consider this decision by the American people a positive sign and wish them a successful future."

Turkish Prime Minister Binali Yildirim said a "new page" would be opened in US-Turkey relations if Washington extradited the Pennsylvania-based cleric Fethullah Gulen who Turkey blames for orchestrating the July 15 failed coup.


US election: How did Hillary Clinton lose?
China

Chinese President Xi Jinping conveyed his congratulations to the president-elect, saying that he looked forward to working with Trump on promoting ties in a "constructive" way that avoided conflict and confrontation.

During his campaign, Trump accused China of illegally subsidising exports, manipulating its currency and stealing intellectual property.

State broadcaster CCTV reported on Wednesday that Xi said the two biggest economies in the world shared common interests and shouldered a "special and important responsibility in upholding world peace".

"I highly value China-US relations and am looking forward to working with you to expand cooperation in all fields, including in bilateral, regional and global aspects."

Britain

"Britain and the United States have an enduring and special relationship based on the values of freedom, democracy and enterprise," British Prime Minister Theresa May said.

South Africa

"Looking forward to working with president-elect [Donald] Trump to build on the strong relations that exist between the two countries," South African President Jacob Zuma said.

Kenya

I highly value China-US relations and am looking forward to working with you to expand cooperation in all fields, including in bilateral, regional and global aspects

Xi Jingping, the Chinese president

Kenyan President Uhuru Kenyatta sent a message of congratulations to Trump, saying: "The American people have spoken, and they have spoken clearly".

"The ties that bind Kenya and the United States of America are close and strong. They are old, and based in the values that we hold dear: in democracy, in the rule of law, and in the equality of peoples."

Japan

Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe sent his "heartfelt congratulations" to the property tycoon-turned-politican on his election.

"As a very successful businessman with extraordinary talents, you not only made a great contribution to the growth of the US economy, but now as a strong leader, you have demonstrated your determination to lead the United States."

IN PICTURES: Shock and euphoria as Trump wins White House
Philippines

Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte, who has lashed out at Democratic president Barack Obama for criticising his anti-drug crackdown, congratulated Trump.

Duterte said he looked forward to working with the new American leader to enhance relations.

The 71-year-old Philippine leader has announced his desire to scale back joint combat drills with the US military and end the presence of foreign troops, including Americans, in the country in two years.

India

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi congratulated Trump on Twitter. Modi tweeted that "we appreciate the friendship you have articulated towards India during your campaign.

Trump had reached out to Indian-American voters at a rally in New Jersey in mid-October, praising Modi and vowing to defeat what he called terrorism.

In the Indian capital on Wednesday, some from right-wing Hindu nationalist group Hindu Sena celebrated Trump's victory at a central protest ground.

Egypt

"[Egypt] now hopes that Donald Trump's presidency will breathe a new spirit into Egyptian-American relations," an Egyptian presidency statement said.
