Approximately 50 House Democrats have decided to protest Trump’s inauguration on Friday.

Williams, who is the president of the Texas State Society—the organization that hosts the event—added that while a couple Texas Democrats have joined the boycott, most of Texas’ delegation has a strong bipartisan working relationship.

The Black Tie and Boots Inaugural Ball is a staple every inauguration year, featuring thousands of tuxedo-wearing Texans and wannabe-Texans donnie cowboy hats, big belt buckles and of course cowboy boots. This year’s record crowd of more than 10,000 cheered along to The Beach Boys and The Gatlin Brothers among others, as Williams and more members of Congress including Rep. Louie Gohmert (R-TX) spoke to the crowd from the stage between sets of the main bands. Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX) was present, too, and Trump’s son Donald Trump, Jr., came in later in the evening as well.

The eldest Trump son, who will take over his business operations at the Trump Organization as the president-elect becomes President of the United States on Friday, spoke from the stage as well saying his father and his father’s team have built a working relationship with Cruz—a huge step forward for the two firebrands after a bitter presidential primary. Even legendary basketball coach Bobby Knight—a staple campaign trail surrogate for Trump—was there, and delivered a rabble-rousing introduction for The Beach Boys.

Williams told Breitbart News that Texans are fired up for Trump, and the Black Tie and Boots Inaugural Ball energy showed it.

Williams said that out of Trump’s speech at his inauguration as the 45th President of the United States, he’s hoping for some key answers on how to help Americans out right away,

Williams added that the businessman mindset winning elections is in his view the “new norm,” not a fluke with Trump.

Williams took a shot at the media too for getting it “so wrong” in 2016, so bad they’re basically irrelevant now.

Williams is also pleased with Trump’s picks of Texans like Rex Tillerson, the ExxonMobil CEO, and former Gov. Rick Perry to be in his administration. Tillerson will be Secretary of State and Perry will be Energy Secretary.
