When Donald Trump is inaugurated as the 45th president in January, Harry Reid won’t be around to lead the opposition.

The longtime Senate Democratic leader is retiring after three decades in Congress. And while he will no longer be at the tip of Democrats’ spear — or perhaps because he won’t — he is in no mood to join the chorus of conciliatory well-wishers hoping and praying for Trump’s success.

In a long statement issued Friday morning, Reid said the onus is on Trump to repair the breach in America’s civic fabric that opened during the long presidential campaign, one that “emboldened the forces of hate and bigotry.” He called the president-elect “a sexual predator who lost the popular vote and fueled his campaign with bigotry and hate” and warned the media against “normalizing” him as he steps toward the presidency.

Reid attacked and mocked Trump for months during the campaign, frequently from the Senate floor, accusing him of trafficking in lies and bullying minorities.

“We as a nation must find a way to move forward without consigning those who Trump has threatened to the shadows,” Reid said in his statement. “Their fear is entirely rational, because Donald Trump has talked openly about doing terrible things to them. Every news piece that breathlessly obsesses over inauguration preparations compounds their fear by normalizing a man who has threatened to tear families apart, who has bragged about sexually assaulting women and who has directed crowds of thousands to intimidate reporters and assault African Americans. Their fear is legitimate and we must refuse to let it fall through the cracks between the fluff pieces.”

“Winning the electoral college does not absolve Trump of the grave sins he committed against millions of Americans,” he continued. “Donald Trump may not possess the capacity to assuage those fears, but he owes it to this nation to try. If Trump wants to roll back tide of hate he unleashed, he has a tremendous amount of work to do and he must begin immediately.”

Reid is one of very few Democrats who could boast of his electoral performance on Tuesday. Voters in Nevada, where Reid is the dominant figure in Democratic politics, favored Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton, elected Democrat Catherine Cortez-Masto to succeed Reid and gave Democrats majorities in both houses of the state legislature.

Reid’s statement in full:

I have personally been on the ballot in Nevada for 26 elections and I have never seen anything like the reaction to the election completed last Tuesday. The election of Donald Trump has emboldened the forces of hate and bigotry in America.

White nationalists, Vladimir Putin and ISIS are celebrating Donald Trump’s victory, while innocent, law-abiding Americans are wracked with fear – especially African Americans, Hispanic Americans, Muslim Americans, LGBT Americans and Asian Americans. Watching white nationalists celebrate while innocent Americans cry tears of fear does not feel like America.

I have heard more stories in the past 48 hours of Americans living in fear of their own government and their fellow Americans than I can remember hearing in five decades in politics. Hispanic Americans who fear their families will be torn apart, African Americans being heckled on the street, Muslim Americans afraid to wear a headscarf, gay and lesbian couples having slurs hurled at them and feeling afraid to walk down the street holding hands. American children waking up in the middle of the night crying, terrified that Trump will take their parents away. Young girls unable to understand why a man who brags about sexually assaulting women has been elected president.

I have a large family. I have one daughter and twelve granddaughters. The texts, emails and phone calls I have received from them have been filled with fear – fear for themselves, fear for their Hispanic and African American friends, for their Muslim and Jewish friends, for their LBGT friends, for their Asian friends. I’ve felt their tears and I’ve felt their fear.

We as a nation must find a way to move forward without consigning those who Trump has threatened to the shadows. Their fear is entirely rational, because Donald Trump has talked openly about doing terrible things to them. Every news piece that breathlessly obsesses over inauguration preparations compounds their fear by normalizing a man who has threatened to tear families apart, who has bragged about sexually assaulting women and who has directed crowds of thousands to intimidate reporters and assault African Americans. Their fear is legitimate and we must refuse to let it fall through the cracks between the fluff pieces.

If this is going to be a time of healing, we must first put the responsibility for healing where it belongs: at the feet of Donald Trump, a sexual predator who lost the popular vote and fueled his campaign with bigotry and hate. Winning the electoral college does not absolve Trump of the grave sins he committed against millions of Americans. Donald Trump may not possess the capacity to assuage those fears, but he owes it to this nation to try.

If Trump wants to roll back tide of hate he unleashed, he has a tremendous amount of work to do and he must begin immediately.
