On Tuesday night, Gwen Carr stood before a throbbing crowd at the Javits Center in Manhattan and talked about all the change Hillary Clinton would usher in.

Ms. Carr, whose son Eric Garner died in July 2014 after being placed in a chokehold by a police officer in Staten Island, then watched from a couch as Donald J. Trump won state after state. She and other “Mothers of the Movement” watching the results held hands and silently began to weep as it became clear there would be no victory to celebrate.

“It was like somebody died when that news came through,” Ms. Carr said.

Mrs. Clinton embraced Ms. Carr and the other mothers of black people killed by the police, and promised that she would crack down on any police mistreatment of minorities. But the election of Mr. Trump was seen by many as a repudiation of their message, as well as of the Black Lives Matter protests that have filled cities for the past two years. And it left questions about what policing would look like under Mr. Trump, who ran on a pledge to restore “law and order.”

Mr. Trump presented himself as the antidote to the Black Lives Matter movement, which has protested the killings of black people by the police. While black activists denounced instances of police brutality and racial profiling, Mr. Trump has said cities need more police officers and more use of “stop and frisk” tactics. While young organizers demanded a decrease in police funding and an increase in community programs, Mr. Trump vowed to put an end to a “war on our police.”

His message resonated across the country, and especially with white voters like Pamela Heilman, 60, a hospital administrator who lives in Grantville, Pa. She said she hoped Mr. Trump would do something about people being mugged in the parking lot of her hospital and make people respect officers more.

“Anybody who watches the news knows we need to have law and order reinstalled and we need to have more support for Blue Lives Matter,” she said, referring to the pro-police slogan that became a retort to the protests.

In recent interviews, other supporters of Mr. Trump have said they want him to institute curfews in city neighborhoods and to increase funding to drug treatment programs. They also expressed approval for widespread use of stop-and-frisk, the police practice of stopping and sometimes searching people in high-crime areas.

While supporters of the practice say it helps officers find illegal weapons and bring down homicide rates, it became a source of enormous tension between the police and black residents in the cities that deployed it. A federal judge in New York struck down the tactic as unconstitutional in 2013, saying the way the city was using it violated the rights of minorities. But if it were ever reinstated, it could one day land in front of a Supreme Court with Trump appointees who could be more open to its use.

“Donald Trump has proposed nothing short of a police state,” said Brittany Packnett, an activist who served on President Obama’s task force on 21st-century policing. “This is backlash to a black president, a black movement and black people being self-determined, bold and unapologetic.”

Mr. Trump’s ability to impose stop-and-frisk, should he follow through on his campaign talk, would be limited by the fact that local police and sheriff’s departments control most aspects of law enforcement. His administration could conceivably use grants to encourage local departments to adopt his policies, much in the way that President Bill Clinton’s Justice Department handed out money to encourage the hiring of tens of thousands of new officers around the country.

Mr. Trump’s Justice Department will have another pressing policy matter: how aggressively to pursue investigations against the police.

Under Mr. Obama, the department has often taken the lead on police violence cases, sometimes looking into prosecuting officers on charges of civil rights violations after local prosecutors declined to charge them or juries declined to convict. The department has in the last couple of years demanded changes from a number of police departments, including in Ferguson, Mo., where it found that officers were violating the constitutional rights of black residents, and in Cleveland, where it found a pattern of “unreasonable and unnecessary use of force” that resulted in dangerous and reckless behavior by officers. Both inquiries came after black residents were killed by local officers.

“What role does he see for his Justice Department in dealing with use-of-force issues, pattern and practice investigations, and the overall role of the Justice Department vis-à-vis local law enforcement?” Chuck Wexler, the executive director of the Police Executive Research Forum, said of Mr. Trump. “We really don’t know yet.”

One of the first issues Mr. Trump’s Justice Department is likely to have to deal with is the case of Mr. Garner, whose dying words, “I can’t breathe,” became a nationwide rallying cry. In December 2014, a state grand jury in Staten Island decided not to bring charges against Officer Daniel Pantaleo, who was seen on a video using a chokehold, prohibited by the New York Police Department, to subdue Mr. Garner.

Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch recently replaced the New York team of federal agents and lawyers investigating the case, who were leaning against filing charges against the officers involved, a move that struck some as political.

On Tuesday night as defeat set in, Ms. Carr began writing a letter to Ms. Lynch pleading with her to quickly decide how to proceed before Mr. Trump takes office.

“Please hear my cry, don’t allow my son’s words and our tears to be in vain,” Ms. Carr wrote before sending it off Friday morning. “I’ve been living in a nightmare and crying for over two years and I’m ready to awake to peace.”

In an interview, Ms. Carr added that she felt new pressure to get the case resolved. “I know my son’s case is on the line, and if it goes past Obama’s administration, we are not going to get any justice,” she said.

William Bateman, 52, who voted for Mr. Trump and works as an operations manager in the Dallas-Fort Worth area, sees things differently. He felt that the Justice Department, under Mr. Obama’s direction, “politicized everything,” and that the president was unfair to the police by “blaming them before they went to trial.”

He also said he believed a constant theme of Mr. Obama’s tenure was a sentiment of exclusion, beginning when the president weighed in on the 2012 shooting death of 17-year-old Trayvon Martin by a neighborhood watch volunteer in Sanford, Fla. “If I had a son, he’d look like Trayvon,” Mr. Obama said then.

“It was like he was defending the black community, the Muslim community, the Hispanic community,” Mr. Bateman said this week. “But not the white community.”

The feeling that Mr. Obama was taking sides reverberated around the country and was part of the reason the National Fraternal Order of Police endorsed Mr. Trump, said Jim Pasco, its executive director. Many saw parallels between Mr. Trump’s law-and-order pledge and Richard M. Nixon’s 1968 campaign that became a reaction to the national strife over the Vietnam War, the Voting Rights Act, the assassinations of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert F. Kennedy, and widespread rioting.

“The atmosphere has gotten harder for police officers because there is a lot of second-guessing by people with a lack of insight into their jobs and a lack of expertise on what constitutes appropriate policing techniques in given situations,” Mr. Pasco said, adding that officers hoped that Mr. Trump would change the nation’s view of policing.

But if the election of Mr. Trump was a counterprotest against Black Lives Matter, there were no signs that protest leaders planned to turn down the volume. Activists like Charlene Carruthers, the national director of Black Youth Project 100, said this week that they were reeling from Mr. Trump’s election and were preparing to strongly oppose his policies.

“We are now facing a presidential administration that not only does not value black people’s lives,” Ms. Carruthers said, “but will promote and support policies that will actively make our lives worse and kill more people.”
