For 18 months, Donald J. Trump the candidate described polling leads he did not always maintain and vote tallies he did not always receive — and, especially, crowd sizes he did not always have.

After his inauguration on Friday, President Trump’s first appearances also involved talking about numbers: the collective IQs of his cabinet picks, how many military members voted for him and, again, the size of a crowd, this time the one that turned out to see him sworn in.

Mr. Trump said of his inauguration crowd: “It looked, honestly, like a million and a half people. Whatever it was, it was, but it went all the way back to the Washington Monument.” In fact, the crowd was significantly smaller. A comparison of photographs from Friday to ones taken of Barack Obama’s 2009 inauguration showed that the crowd on the National Mall for Mr. Trump was about a third the size of the crowd for Mr. Obama.

But Mr. Trump, who has branded himself as everything from a world-class developer to a reality-television star to, later, a plausible presidential candidate, has long deployed what he described in his first book, “The Art of the Deal,” as “truthful hyperbole,” and others might call lies.

It is “an innocent form of exaggeration — and a very effective form of promotion,” he wrote. It was a way of faking it till he made it for a businessman who decided early that success was measured in large numbers. He said he was a “winner,” and metrics not his own were needles.

“The crowds, the ratings, the estimate of his wealth, the legitimacy of his presidential victory all are intrinsic to being synonymous with success,” said Sam Nunberg, a longtime aide to Mr. Trump who worked for him early in his campaign. “So the major issue is, how does he go forward with this new paradigm of being able to translate this into the Oval Office?”

In the decades between Mr. Trump’s first book and his election as president, he has been accused of exaggerating his wealth (he has bitterly denied doing so, but has refused to release his tax returns); of overstating his ownership interests in properties around the world; and of falsely promoting himself as a great philanthropist, a claim shredded during the campaign.

Mr. Trump has long recognized the power that numbers hold for capturing people’s imaginations: the bigger and more impressive, the better. At his first news conference as president-elect, he put stacks of manila folders, supposedly filled with details of his business deals, on a long table in front of the room.

To critics and biographers, his outsize claims of being “huge,” as he said repeatedly in 2015, were evidence of an overweening ego that constantly needed to be fed and shown deference.

But to the dismay of professional fact-checkers and his political opponents, the warnings about his erroneous claims did not matter at all to his supporters. If anything, they made those supporters question the news organizations that reported the falsehoods all the more.

What these well-honed habits will mean for Mr. Trump’s presidency is an open question, with vastly higher stakes.

The words of American presidents carry enormous weight globally. The government’s intelligence and economic data is relied on to be precise. And Mr. Trump has often fudged small, easily checked details with no clear reason for doing so.

But admitting he was wrong is almost never in Mr. Trump’s playbook.

Lanhee J. Chen, a foreign policy adviser to Mitt Romney in the 2012 presidential campaign, said that Mr. Trump’s previous prevarications about numbers did not necessarily reflect what he would do in office. And he suggested that outrage over every exaggeration by Mr. Trump would only deepen the support of his loyalists.

“I think every administration does their fair amount of gymnastics when it comes to policy-related matters,” Mr. Chen said. “For example, the Obama administration knew that it likely was the case that many people couldn’t keep the health insurance plans they liked when the A.C.A. was passed, but that didn’t keep them from saying it anyway.”

A White House official said Mr. Trump saw the uproar over his claims as part of an effort to cast his presidency as illegitimate.

The debate over crowd size was one of the constants of Mr. Trump’s campaign: a way for him to accuse the “dishonest media” of diminishing the movement behind him, and a yardstick to use against others. When Senator Bernie Sanders drew equally large crowds, Mr. Trump still maintained that Mr. Sanders, the Democratic challenger to Hillary Clinton, was second best.

Mr. Trump has continued to recall the size of his rallies since his election — it was a staple of his “thank you” tour of states that supported him. This bemuses strategists and lawmakers, who do not understand his sense of perpetual grievance. But it also serves the purpose of connecting him to his supporters as he disappears behind the walls of official Washington.

“He really has no one but those who voted for him,” the Wall Street Journal columnist Peggy Noonan wrote last week.

Mr. Trump’s revival of his greatest campaign hits is a continuing message to that group.

“His supporters would say that this is very refreshing,” Mr. Chen said, “that the candidate doesn’t become someone different when they win. This is really kind of refreshingly consistent so far.”
