President-elect Donald J. Trump praised a business partner from Dubai during a New Year’s Eve party at his lavish Mar-a-Lago resort in Palm Beach, Fla., on Saturday night, raising new questions about the scope of his potential business conflicts around the world just weeks before he is sworn in.

In a video captured by a guest, Mr. Trump can be heard singling out “Hussain and the whole family” as “the most beautiful people,” apparently referring to Hussain Sajwani, the chairman of Damac Properties, which has built the Trump International Golf Club, Dubai; Trump Prvt luxury homes; and a Trump Spa, in addition to building a second golf course there that is scheduled to open next year.

The tape, obtained by CNN on Monday night, is the latest reminder of Mr. Trump’s vast array of global business relationships that could create conflicts of interest for his presidency, including the prospect that a commander in chief might make policy decisions guided by what is best for his own family’s brand and wealth.

Hope Hicks, a spokeswoman for Mr. Trump, sidestepped questions about the issue on Monday night, saying only that the gathering where the president-elect had praised the Dubai billionaire had been a “social event.”

But the episode illustrated just how blurry the line is likely to be between the comments and actions of a President Trump and the interests he shares with scores of business associates he has cultivated around the world.

“Even if this was truly a social meeting and not a business one, there’s a cloud of doubt that hangs over it and will last for the next four years unless he sells the business outside of the family and places the assets in a true blind trust,” said Jordan Libowitz, a spokesman for Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, a nonprofit legal watchdog group.

“When he makes foreign policy decisions that affect Dubai, will they be in the interest of the American people or in the interest of his business partnership?” Mr. Libowitz said. “Is he catching up with an old friend or ironing out a secret deal? We have no way of knowing.”

Mr. Trump canceled a news conference last month at which he had said he would provide details about how he planned to sever ties with his vast business empire and alleviate conflicts.

While he has noted, correctly, that anti-conflict laws will not apply to him as president, Mr. Trump said he would work to eliminate even the appearance of such inappropriate influence. He has rejected calls to liquidate his company and place the proceeds in a blind trust, as ethics experts in both parties have urged. He has said he plans to separate himself from the Trump Organization and leave his sons, Eric Trump and Donald J. Trump Jr., at the helm.

Still, the details of how he would remove himself from an organization that bears his name and operates in dozens of countries, including many that have complicated relationships with the United States, are murky at best.

Mr. Trump has dismissed such questions. On Twitter last month, he suggested that journalists were manufacturing controversy about the issue.

“The media tries so hard to make my move to the White House, as it pertains to my business, so complex — when actually it isn’t!” he wrote.

Mr. Trump has an important partnership with Mr. Sajwani, whose company is building Akoya, a 42-million-square-foot development that includes the Trump golf course, Trump-branded luxury homes and the Trump Spa and Wellness Center.

Mr. Sajwani, who is close to the emir of Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates, said after Mr. Trump’s election that he hoped to deepen his business relationship with the Trump Organization, telling NBC News that he was confident that his deep relationships with the three children of Mr. Trump who run his business would allow him to do so.

After the election, Mr. Sajwani said he had met in the United States with Ivanka Trump, Mr. Trump’s eldest daughter, who is exploring a move to Washington to play some role in her father’s administration.
