The president offered Americans a bit of levity on Wednesday morning amid his broadsides about the Russia investigation and complaints about fake news, closing out a busy day of tweeting with the message, “Despite the constant negative press covfefe.”

Though it spawned some amusing responses, the tweet was not appreciably stranger than most of the president’s tweets, which frequently feature misspellings, unconventional capitalization and unusual use of quotation marks. In fact, the “covfefe” gaffe was just the latest of Mr. Trump’s tweets to bear an uncanny resemblance to certain strains of absurdist Twitter comedy.

Sometime in the early 2010s, a style of humor marked by bizarre spelling, grammar and subject matter became popular on Twitter. Ultimately known as “weird Twitter,” it was tough to define — talking about weird Twitter was a surefire way to get made fun of by weird Twitter — but easy to spot. Practitioners included @dril, who remains anonymous, and Patricia Lockwood, a poet and the author of the recent memoir “Priestdaddy.” Along with @horse_ebooks, an account that tweeted seemingly random but frequently entertaining snippets of text, the weird Twitter comedians presided over the emergence of a new and ridiculous form of humor.

While the heyday of weird Twitter is probably over (the form may have reached peak awareness in 2013, with an oral history by John Herrman and Katie Notopoulous at BuzzFeed), its spirit lives on in high-concept humor accounts like @SICKOFWOLVES, the online performance art of Chuck Tingle — and, most oddly, in the early-morning missives of President Trump.

Mr. Trump isn’t the first politician to exhibit weird Twitter characteristics — weird Twitter denizens sometimes counted Senator Chuck Grassley as one of their own for tweets like this:

But when it comes to strange sentences and a tenuous connection to reality, Mr. Trump has the rest of Washington beat. You don’t even need to go to covfefe to see the weird-Twitter resemblance. Let’s look at some of the president’s ordinary, everyday tweets, paired with tweets from @horse_ebooks:

Like Mr. Trump, Chuck Tingle likes capitalizing words in the middle of sentences. Observe:

Mr. Tingle also sometimes tweets when he doesn’t mean to.

Interestingly, he hates President Trump.

David Covucci at The Daily Dot noticed the resemblance between @realDonaldTrump and @dril back in March, and offered a number of helpful comparisons, including this one:

Mr. Covucci floated one possible explanation for the similarity: “Dril’s real identity has never been made public. What if Donald Trump is @dril? Would it be any stranger than Donald Trump being president of the United States?”

While installing one of its own as president would certainly be weird Twitter’s greatest troll, another explanation seems more likely: Donald Trump’s Twitter presence isn’t absurdist, it’s just absurd. Unmoored from proper grammar and spelling as well as from reality itself, his tweets are sometimes funny — who can resist a good “covfefe” joke? — and always scary.

It would be unfair to blame Mr. Trump for the decline of weird Twitter — that particular school of comedy was fragmenting and changing before his campaign got going. But it’s certainly true that weird Twitter was funny in part because other segments of Twitter were normal, and now that Mr. Trump has warped not just Twitter but American life with his deeply weird presence, mere absurdity no longer registers as parody. In fact, perhaps the best Trump parody is @MatureTrump, which imagines a world in which Mr. Trump “acted like the President that the country needs, as well as the one it deserves.” @MatureTrump uses standard sentence structure to make typical presidential announcements and express reasonable sentiments about the direction of the country.

Unfortunately, @MatureTrump last tweeted on February 19. We’re on our own now.
