SECTIONS HOME SEARCHSKIP TO CONTENTSKIP TO NAVIGATIONVIEW MOBILE VERSION
The New York Times
SUBSCRIBE NOW  LOG IN  SETTINGS

Justice Dept. Can’t Tie Police Funding to Help on Immigration, Judge Rules

Oklahoma Teachers End Walkout After Winning Raises and Additional Funding

Hurricane Names That ‘Don’t Bear Repeating’: Harvey, Irma, Maria and Nate

Holocaust Is Fading From Memory, Survey Finds

Sex Claims Against Gov. Eric Greitens of Missouri Vividly Detailed in Report

Man Accused of Raping Michigan Teenager Is Now Charged With Killing Her

Teacher Walkouts Threaten Republican Grip on Conservative States

Paul Ryan’s Hometown Takes Stock as Speaker (and Neighbor) Changes Course

Before Learning of Raid, Trump’s Legal Team Convened to Discuss Mueller Interview

Backpage Chief Pleads Guilty to Conspiracy and Money Laundering

Kudlow Plays ‘Happy Warrior’ Role in Counseling Trump

Trump Plans to Pardon Scooter Libby in C.I.A. Leak Case

Trump, Having Denounced Amazon’s Shipping Deal, Orders Review of Postal Service

Publisher Broke Campaign Finance Law by Paying to Suppress Another Trump Story, Filing Alleges

What Could Happen if Trump Fired Rosenstein

Comey’s Memoir Offers Visceral Details on a President ‘Untethered to Truth’
Where Does Trump’s Border Wall Stand Today?

Ryan Tries to Ensure Orderly Succession, but Unrest Simmers

As Deficits Mount, Amendment to Require Balanced Budgets Fails in House

Appeals Court Questions Dual Roles of Consumer Bureau’s Director
Loading...
ELECTION 2016 Full Results   Exit Polls   Trump’s Cabinet
Religious Right Believes Donald Trump Will Deliver on His Promises
By LAURIE GOODSTEINNOV. 11, 2016

Continue reading the main storyShare This Page
Share
Tweet
Email
More
Save
Photo

Ralph Reed, chairman of the Faith and Freedom Coalition, helped mobilize Christian voters for Donald J. Trump. Credit Charles Dharapak/Associated Press
Donald J. Trump rarely goes to church, said he’s never sought forgiveness for his sins, and in his acceptance speech early Wednesday morning, never mentioned God.

Religion was almost invisible during the presidential campaign, and yet it is the missing piece in understanding Mr. Trump’s victory. The Christian right worked largely under the national media’s radar this year, but it helped deliver the presidency to a thrice-married mogul who bragged about groping women and has been accused by multiple women of actually doing it.

They were willing to forgive Mr. Trump’s personal transgressions because he stoked their fears that a Hillary Clinton administration would take away their religious liberties, use their tax dollars to fund late-term abortions at home and abroad, and expand the rights of gay and transgender people, political analysts said. Mr. Trump warned at rallies and at conservative Christian gatherings that he alone was their last hope to protect them against a changing culture, using the refrain, “This is your last chance.”

Now that he has won, evangelical leaders say they are confident Mr. Trump will deliver on the political promises he made to them. These include appointing a conservative to the Supreme Court, defunding Planned Parenthood, protecting businesses that refuse to provide services for same-sex weddings and rescinding the mandate in the Affordable Care Act that requires insurance coverage for birth control.

And with Gov. Mike Pence of Indiana, an evangelical with a record of legislating against abortion and same-sex marriage, as vice president, Christian leaders say they feel reassured they will have access to the White House and a seat at the table.

Continue reading the main story

Presidential Election 2016
Complete coverage of the 2016 presidential race and Donald J. Trump’s victory.
Hillary Clinton Gets an Award and Tears Are Shed
NOV 2
‘The Daily’: Kris Kobach’s Quest Against Voter Fraud
JUL 17
How Does Comey’s Fall Play in Hillaryland? No One’s Celebrating
MAY 10
‘Shattered,’ Book About Clinton Campaign, May Become TV Series
MAY 4
The Culture of Nastiness
See More »

RELATED COVERAGE

Opinion Op-Ed Contributor
The Rage of White, Christian America NOV. 10, 2016

Donald Trump Reveals Evangelical Rifts That Could Shape Politics for Years OCT. 17, 2016

For Trump Voters, Uncertainty Mixes With Elation NOV. 9, 2016

Torn Over Donald Trump and Cut Off by Culture Wars, Evangelicals Despair SEPT. 29, 2016

Group Questions Donald Trump’s Lock on Evangelical Voters OCT. 7, 2016
“I am confident he will do as president what he said he would do as a candidate,” said Ralph Reed, chairman of the Faith and Freedom Coalition, who helped mobilize Christian voters for Mr. Trump.

White evangelicals and Catholics voted for Mr. Trump at even higher rates than they voted for the last two Republican presidential nominees, John McCain and Mitt Romney, according to an analysis by the Pew Research Center.

“The wall of white Christian voters held,” said Robert P. Jones, chief executive of the Public Religion Research Institute and author of “The End of White Christian America.”

White evangelicals make up 26 percent of the American electorate, and 81 percent of them voted for Mr. Trump, despite loud criticism by some in their ranks that he was racist, misogynistic and unfit for the presidency. Only 16 percent voted for Mrs. Clinton.

Photo

Russell Moore, president of the Ethics & Religious Liberty Commission of the Southern Baptist Convention, said he hoped the new president could become a unifying figure. Credit Mark Humphrey/Associated Press
Catholics, who make up 23 percent of the electorate, supported Mr. Trump over Mrs. Clinton by 52 percent to 45 percent. White Catholics voted for him in far greater proportions than Hispanic Catholics, who favored Mrs. Clinton over Mr. Trump, 67 to 26 percent.

“There was no way he had a chance without the pop of that Catholic vote,” Mr. Reed said.

Mr. Trump was not the first choice of most evangelicals or Catholics. But he gradually won their trust, speaking at Liberty University in Virginia, the largest Christian college in the country, doing nine interviews with Pat Robertson’s Christian Broadcasting Network and building relationships with Pentecostal preachers. In June, he met with nearly one thousand evangelical and Catholic leaders from around the country in a hotel ballroom in New York. In October, he sent a letter to the Catholic Leadership Conference in Denver, promising, “I will fight for you.”

Newsletter Sign UpContinue reading the main story
California Today
The news and stories that matter to Californians (and anyone else interested in the state), delivered weekday mornings.


Enter your email address
 Sign Up

You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services.

SEE SAMPLE PRIVACY POLICY OPT OUT OR CONTACT US ANYTIME
Mrs. Clinton, in contrast, failed to connect with white evangelicals and Catholics, said Michael Wear, a political consultant who served as a faith adviser for President Obama.

“Evangelicals feel embattled, they feel isolated, and Trump understood that and appealed to them on completely Machiavellian terms. But Hillary actually confirmed their sense of isolation by not reaching out to them,” said Mr. Wear, the author of “Reclaiming Hope: Lessons Learned in the Obama White House About the Future of Faith in America.” “Hillary’s lack of outreach basically told evangelicals, ‘You need Trump as much as Trump says you do.’”

As recently as five years ago, Christians were far more judgmental of politicians accused of transgressions in their personal lives. Now, in the era of Mr. Trump, there is more tolerance, especially among evangelicals, according to a study by Mr. Jones’s institute. The group often called “values voters” was not dissuaded by headlines about Mr. Trump sexually harassing women, lying, refusing to pay taxes or stiffing contractors.

“Trump has really changed their entire political ethic. It’s moved from a principled basis to more of a utilitarian ethic, where the ends justify the means,” Mr. Jones said.

Grace and forgiveness are at the core of Christian faith, and it was only natural for evangelicals to extend that concept to Mr. Trump, said Eric Metaxas, an evangelical writer and radio host in New York City whose endorsement surprised many of his friends.

“We understand. We’re all screwed up. We all sin. To judge people by fussy moral standards is something I think is no longer the issue it used to be,” Mr. Metaxas said. “I think a lot of people believe he’s not the person he was in 2005,” the year Mr. Trump was recorded on videotape saying he made a habit of kissing and grabbing women.

There were prominent evangelicals publicly opposed to Mr. Trump — a phenomenon that Mr. Reed argued only brought more attention to those who supported him. But now that Mr. Trump is headed for the White House, some of those “Never Trump” evangelicals are coming around.

Russell Moore, president of the Ethics & Religious Liberty Commission of the Southern Baptist Convention, said he would “give the new president the benefit of the doubt.” If Nixon could go to China, Dr. Moore said, Mr. Trump could be a “unifying figure.”

Follow Laurie Goodstein @lauriegnyt on Twitter. For breaking news and in-depth reporting, follow @NYTNational.

A version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2016, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Evangelicals Believe Trump Will Keep Promises. Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE
Opinion Op-Ed Contributor
The Rage of White, Christian America NOV. 10, 2016

Donald Trump Reveals Evangelical Rifts That Could Shape Politics for Years OCT. 17, 2016

For Trump Voters, Uncertainty Mixes With Elation NOV. 9, 2016

SHOW ALL
TRENDING

Trump, Having Denounced Amazon’s Shipping Deal, Orders Review of Postal Service

Nonfiction: James Comey Has a Story to Tell. It’s Very Persuasive.

Comey’s Memoir Offers Visceral Details on a President ‘Untethered to Truth’

Trump Proposes Rejoining Trans-Pacific Partnership

Feature: Why America’s Black Mothers and Babies Are in a Life-or-Death Crisis

Modern Love: What Sleeping With Married Men Taught Me About Infidelity

Op-Ed Columnist: The Paul Ryan Story: From Flimflam to Fascism

Trump Plans to Pardon Scooter Libby in C.I.A. Leak Case

Tech Fix: I Downloaded the Information That Facebook Has on Me. Yikes.

Holocaust Is Fading From Memory, Survey Finds
View More Trending Stories »

What's Next
Loading...
Go to Home Page »
SITE INDEX THE NEW YORK TIMES
Site Index Navigation
NEWS
World
U.S.
Politics
N.Y.
Business
Tech
Science
Health
Sports
Education
Obituaries
Today's Paper
Corrections
OPINION
Today's Opinion
Op-Ed Columnists
Editorials
Op-Ed Contributors
Letters
Sunday Review
Video: Opinion
ARTS
Today's Arts
Art & Design
Books
Dance
Movies
Music
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Television
Theater
Video: Arts
LIVING
Automobiles
Crossword
Food
Education
Fashion & Style
Health
Jobs
Magazine
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Real Estate
T Magazine
Travel
Weddings & Celebrations
LISTINGS & MORE
Reader Center
Classifieds
Tools & Services
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Multimedia
Photography
Video
NYT Store
Times Journeys
Subscribe
Manage My Account
NYTCo
SUBSCRIBE
 Home Delivery
 Digital Subscriptions
 Crossword
Email Newsletters
Alerts
Gift Subscriptions
Group Subscriptions
Education Rate
Mobile Applications
Replica Edition
Site Information Navigation
© 2018 The New York Times Company HomeSearchAccessibility concerns? Email us at accessibility@nytimes.com. We would love to hear from you.Contact UsWork With UsAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite Information Navigation
Site MapHelpSite FeedbackSubscriptions Go to the next story
