SECTIONS HOME SEARCHSKIP TO CONTENTSKIP TO NAVIGATIONVIEW MOBILE VERSION
The New York Times
SUBSCRIBE NOW  LOG IN  SETTINGS

A Libyan Strongman Looks to Washington, but a Health Crisis Looms

Pierre Sioufi, Who Sheltered ‘the Kids’ of the Arab Spring, Is Dead at 56
What It’s Like to Endure Aerial Attacks

Noting Threat of Missile Strikes, Airlines Clear Skies Over Syria

In a Syrian Town, People Started Shouting: ‘Chemicals! Chemicals!’

Suspected Chemical Attack in Syria: What We Know and Don’t Know

Steep Slide in Currency Threatens Iran’s Economy

Trump Promises Strike on Syria and Warns Russia Against Backing Assad
Military Plane Crash Is Algeria’s Worst Air Disaster, With 257 Dead
Israel Faults Soldiers Who Filmed and Cheered Shooting of Palestinian

Trump Now Sees Qatar as an Ally Against Terrorism

This Is the Beirut We Wish You Could See

THE INTERPRETER
America’s Three Bad Options in Syria
Iran Threatens Israel Over Airstrike in Syria

Trump Cancels Trip to Latin America, Citing Crisis in Syria

133,000 Flee Besieged Syrian Towns in Eastern Ghouta, U.N. Says

Qatar Charm Offensive Appears to Have Paid Off, U.S. Officials Say
Video Shows Israeli Forces Shooting a Palestinian, Then Rejoicing

Australia Shocked by Death of 2,400 Sheep on Ship to Qatar

Syrian Forces Aimed to Kill Journalists, U.S. Court Is Told
Loading...
MIDDLE EAST
Donald Trump Likely to End Aid for Rebels Fighting Syrian Government
By DAVID E. SANGERNOV. 11, 2016

Continue reading the main storyShare This Page
Share
Tweet
Email
More
Save
Photo

A member of the Syrian Democratic Forces, a United States-backed Kurdish-Arab alliance, inside Syria. Credit Delil Souleiman/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
WASHINGTON — President-elect Donald J. Trump said Friday that he was likely to abandon the American effort to support “moderate” opposition groups in Syria who are battling the government of President Bashar al-Assad, saying “we have no idea who these people are.”

In an interview with The Wall Street Journal that dealt largely with economic issues, including his willingness to retain parts of the Affordable Care Act, he repeated a position he took often during his campaign: that the United States should focus on defeating the Islamic State, and find common ground with the Syrians and their Russian backers.

“I’ve had an opposite view of many people regarding Syria,” Mr. Trump told The Journal. “My attitude was you’re fighting Syria, Syria is fighting ISIS, and you have to get rid of ISIS. Russia is now totally aligned with Syria, and now you have Iran, which is becoming powerful, because of us, is aligned with Syria.”

His comments suggest that once Mr. Trump begins overseeing both the public support for the opposition groups, and a far larger covert effort run by the Central Intelligence Agency, he may wind down or abandon the effort. But there are in fact two wars going on simultaneously in Syria.

One is against the Islamic State, in which the United States is supporting 30,000 Syrian-Kurdish and Syrian-Arab fighters, who last weekend announced they were opening a new phase of the battle, beginning to encircle the ISIS capital in Raqqa. There are roughly 300 United States Special Operations forces on the ground assisting these militia.

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE

‘Never Trump’ Becomes ‘Maybe Trump’ in Foreign Policy Sphere NOV. 10, 2016

THE INTERPRETER
Uncertainty Over Donald Trump’s Foreign Policy Risks Global Instability NOV. 9, 2016
The second effort is in support of rebels fighting Mr. Assad. The C.I.A. covert program is by far the largest conduit of support, providing antitank missiles to rebels fighting the government. That is the program that Mr. Trump seems most intent on ending. If the United States pursues that line, “We end up fighting Russia, fighting Syria,” Mr. Trump told The Journal.

The argument for ending the support may be bolstered by the fact that, as a matter of survival, those opposition groups have entered into battlefield alliances with the affiliate of Al Qaeda in Syria, formerly known as Al Nusra. This has had the effect of allowing Mr. Assad and Russia to argue that they are attacking Al Qaeda, and the United States should aid them in that effort. Secretary of State John Kerry acknowledged that argument during his ultimately failed effort to reach a deal for a cease-fire and an ultimate settlement.

Newsletter Sign UpContinue reading the main story
The Interpreter Newsletter
Understand the world with sharp insight and commentary on the major news stories of the week.


Enter your email address
 Sign Up

You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services.

SEE SAMPLE PRIVACY POLICY OPT OUT OR CONTACT US ANYTIME
Mr. Trump’s the-enemy-of-my-enemy-is-my-friend logic is consistent with what he said during the campaign. “I’m not saying Assad is a good man, ‘cause he’s not,” he told The New York Times in an interview in March, “but our far greater problem is not Assad, it’s ISIS.”

But it also takes a position that will gratify President Vladimir V. Putin, because it suggests that rather than pressure Russia to end its support of Mr. Assad, a Trump administration will get out of Mr. Putin’s way.

In another hint of a major change in policy, one of Mr. Trump’s primary national security advisers, Lt. General Michael T. Flynn, the retired head of the Defense Intelligence Agency, wrote in The Hill newspaper this week that the United States should extradite Fethullah Gulen who Turkey has demanded should be sent back from his exile in Pennsylvania. The Turkish government of Recep Tayyip Erdogan has blamed him for a coup attempt over the summer.

The Justice Department has not yet concluded that there is any convincing evidence that Mr. Gulen should be sent back to almost certain confinement or execution under an extradition treaty with the United States. They see the request as part of Mr. Erdogan’s effort to eliminate all opposition.

Mr. Flynn adopted many of Turkey’s arguments about Mr. Gulen, arguing that “American taxpayers are helping finance Gulen’s 160 charter schools” in the United States, and that it is more important to support Turkey than be “hoodwinked by this masked source of terror and instability nestled comfortably in our own backyard.”

Eric Schmitt contributed reporting.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

A version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2016, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Trump Likely to End Aid for the Rebels Fighting the Syrian Government. Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE
‘Never Trump’ Becomes ‘Maybe Trump’ in Foreign Policy Sphere NOV. 10, 2016

THE INTERPRETER
Uncertainty Over Donald Trump’s Foreign Policy Risks Global Instability NOV. 9, 2016

TRENDING

Trump, Having Denounced Amazon’s Shipping Deal, Orders Review of Postal Service

Nonfiction: James Comey Has a Story to Tell. It’s Very Persuasive.

Comey’s Memoir Offers Visceral Details on a President ‘Untethered to Truth’

Trump Proposes Rejoining Trans-Pacific Partnership

Feature: Why America’s Black Mothers and Babies Are in a Life-or-Death Crisis

Modern Love: What Sleeping With Married Men Taught Me About Infidelity

Op-Ed Columnist: The Paul Ryan Story: From Flimflam to Fascism

Trump Plans to Pardon Scooter Libby in C.I.A. Leak Case

Tech Fix: I Downloaded the Information That Facebook Has on Me. Yikes.

Holocaust Is Fading From Memory, Survey Finds
View More Trending Stories »

What's Next
Loading...
Go to Home Page »
SITE INDEX THE NEW YORK TIMES
Site Index Navigation
NEWS
World
U.S.
Politics
N.Y.
Business
Tech
Science
Health
Sports
Education
Obituaries
Today's Paper
Corrections
OPINION
Today's Opinion
Op-Ed Columnists
Editorials
Op-Ed Contributors
Letters
Sunday Review
Video: Opinion
ARTS
Today's Arts
Art & Design
Books
Dance
Movies
Music
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Television
Theater
Video: Arts
LIVING
Automobiles
Crossword
Food
Education
Fashion & Style
Health
Jobs
Magazine
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Real Estate
T Magazine
Travel
Weddings & Celebrations
LISTINGS & MORE
Reader Center
Classifieds
Tools & Services
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Multimedia
Photography
Video
NYT Store
Times Journeys
Subscribe
Manage My Account
NYTCo
SUBSCRIBE
 Home Delivery
 Digital Subscriptions
 Crossword
Email Newsletters
Alerts
Gift Subscriptions
Group Subscriptions
Education Rate
Mobile Applications
Replica Edition
Site Information Navigation
© 2018 The New York Times Company HomeSearchAccessibility concerns? Email us at accessibility@nytimes.com. We would love to hear from you.Contact UsWork With UsAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite Information Navigation
Site MapHelpSite FeedbackSubscriptions Go to the next story
