SECTIONS HOME SEARCHSKIP TO CONTENTSKIP TO NAVIGATIONVIEW MOBILE VERSION
The New York Times
SUBSCRIBE NOW  LOG IN  SETTINGS

Trump, Having Denounced Amazon’s Shipping Deal, Orders Review of Postal...

NONFICTION
James Comey Has a Story to Tell. It’s Very Persuasive.

Comey’s Memoir Offers Visceral Details on a President ‘Untethered to Truth’

Trump Proposes Rejoining Trans-Pacific Partnership

FEATURE
Why America’s Black Mothers and Babies Are in a...

MODERN LOVE
What Sleeping With Married Men Taught Me About Infidelity

OP-ED COLUMNIST
The Paul Ryan Story: From Flimflam to Fascism

Trump Plans to Pardon Scooter Libby in C.I.A. Leak Case
Play Video
TECH FIX
I Downloaded the Information That Facebook Has on...

Holocaust Is Fading From Memory, Survey Finds

Pentagon Urges Greater Caution on Imminent Strike Against Syria

This Man Expects to Run a 2:50 in the Boston Marathon on Monday
Play Video
2 Days, 10 Hours, 600 Questions: What Happened When Mark Zuckerberg...

OP-ED COLUMNIST
A Renaissance on the Right

Billionaire vs. Billionaire: A Tug of War Between 2 Rogue Donors

In Missouri, Governor’s Scandal Ensnares a Republican-Leaning...

The Gladiators of ‘Scandal’ Leave the Arena

Is Trump Serious About Trade War? China’s Leaders Hunt for Answers

SOCIAL Q’S
R.I.P. My Whole Family

OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
Little to Cheer About
Loading...
BRIEFING
Donald Trump, Leonard Cohen, ‘Arrival’: Your Friday Briefing
By SEAN ALFANONOV. 11, 2016

Continue reading the main storyShare This Page
Share
Tweet
Email
More
Save
Photo

President-elect Donald J. Trump with his wife, Melania, and Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, at the Capitol on Thursday. Credit Al Drago/The New York Times
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’s what you need to know:

• Trump visits the White House and Capitol Hill …

President-elect Donald J. Trump and President Obama spoke for 90 minutes on Thursday and made a public show of putting their differences aside.

“We now are going to want to do everything we can to help you succeed, because if you succeed, then the country succeeds,” Mr. Obama told Mr. Trump.

The president-elect said: “I very much look forward to dealing with the president in the future, including counsel.”

TODAY IN BABSON PARK, MAUpdate Location
Pleasant with times of clouds and sun
 50°F 66° 51°
TOMORROW:   60° 37°
• … and gets to work.

The Republican National Committee chairman, Reince Priebus, and Mr. Trump’s campaign chief, the Breitbart executive Steve Bannon, are said to be top candidates for chief of staff.

Mr. Trump’s transition team includes corporate executives, consultants and lobbyists — roles he said during the campaign exert too much influence in Washington.

Continue reading the main story
Morning Briefing
Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning. See all Morning, Weekend and Evening briefings together.
Paul Ryan, Facebook, Syria: Your Thursday Briefing
APR 12
Mark Zuckerberg, Donald Trump, Syria: Your Wednesday Briefing
APR 11
Michael Cohen, Syria, Mark Zuckerberg: Your Tuesday Briefing
APR 10
Syria, North Korea, ‘Mean Girls’: Your Monday Briefing
APR 9
China, Donald Trump, Russia: Your Friday Briefing
APR 6
See More »

A number of the members listed are experts with no clear interest in helping private-sector clients. But critics of Mr. Trump in both parties say the inclusion of advisers with industry ties signals that he may not follow through on his promises.

• Dissecting the election.

White women played a large role in Mr. Trump’s victory, according to exit polls. Several told us in interviews that his experience as a businessman won their vote.

Hillary Clinton’s female supporters expressed pain and shock over her loss. “It kind of felt like being punched in the stomach,” one said.

We look at some of the campaign missteps that may have led to her defeat.

• Hostilities on campus.

Photo

Officers in Portland, Ore., arrested 29 people in a protest that they described on Twitter as a “riot.” The police said they had received widespread reports of vandalism, fires and broken windows.
Credit Steve Dipaola/Reuters
Universities across the nation are scrambling to address a series of hostile acts against minorities that suggest the election has fueled a backlash against efforts to promote cultural diversity.

Similar episodes have been reported at high schools, including one in Pennsylvania where a video circulated of students carrying a Trump sign and yelling “white power” as they walked down a hall.

• Lesson on air pollution.

We look back to 1873, when a weeklong yellow fog killed more than 700 people in Britain, and at how it took until 1956 for clean air legislation to pass. The crisis demonstrated the difficulties of putting public health first when it comes into conflict with economic growth.

Photo

A family fighting through the choking dust and smog that has enveloped New Delhi. Credit Harish Tyagi/European Pressphoto Agency
Parallels can be seen today in New Delhi, where dirty air recently forced schools to close for three days.

• In memoriam.

Leonard Cohen, an enigmatic and reluctant pop star, has died at 82.

Mr. Cohen, a Canadian poet and novelist, abandoned a promising literary career to become one of the foremost songwriters of the contemporary era. His best-known song may well be “Hallelujah.”

Photo

Leonard Cohen in 2013. More than 2,000 recordings of his songs have been made. Credit Sandro Campardo/European Pressphoto Agency
In “You Want It Darker,” the title track of his final studio album that was released last month, he sings, “I’m ready, my Lord.”

Newsletter Sign UpContinue reading the main story
Get the Morning Briefing by Email
What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.


Enter your email address
 Sign Up

You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services.

SEE SAMPLE PRIVACY POLICY OPT OUT OR CONTACT US ANYTIME
Business
• LinkedIn, the professional networking site, will be blocked in Russia after a Moscow court ruled that it breached data protection laws.

• Marijuana use in some form is legal in more than half the U.S., but the federal ban on the drug means that products cannot cross state lines.

Dixie Brands is trying to expand its operation beyond Colorado. Here’s a look at the hurdles they’re facing.

• Are you considering a big life change? If so, the key to pulling it off is planning and rigorous questioning of what you think you know, our financial advice columnist writes.

“Maybe something you always considered true is nothing more than someone else’s opinion,” he suggests.

• U.S. stocks were up on Thursday. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.

MARKET SNAPSHOT 11:51 PMView Full Overview
NIKKEI+0.54%SHANGHAI–0.39%
CLOSED
S.& P. 500+0.83%
CLOSED
Noteworthy
• Illuminating a world wonder.


THE DAILY 360 By MARGARET CHEATHAM WILLIAMS, NIKO KOPPEL and KAITLYN MULLIN 1:15
Powering Up the Grand Canyon
Click and drag your mouse to explore.
Video
Powering Up the Grand Canyon
Kevin Hartigan, who works for the largest energy utility in Arizona, keeps the lights on at Grand Canyon National Park. By MARGARET CHEATHAM WILLIAMS, NIKO KOPPEL and KAITLYN MULLIN on Publish Date November 11, 2016. Photo by Tamir Kalifa for The New York Times. Technology by Samsung.. Watch in Times Video »
 Embed
ShareTweet
Our latest 360 video looks at what it takes to keep the lights on at Grand Canyon National Park.

• New at the movies …

The sci-fi film “Arrival” has some eerie extraterrestrials, but not a lot of action. Instead it “leans into feeling and thinking, and reminds you again that there’s more to this genre than heavy artillery,” our critic says.

Photo

Eddie Redmayne plays Newt Scamander in “Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them.” Credit Jaap Buitendijk/Warner Bros. Pictures
“Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them,” J.K. Rowling’s first screenplay, is influenced by the spread of populism around the world. Searching for the right tone was a challenge: “One of them was really dark,” she said of a draft.

• … and in books

Next week, Megyn Kelly’s memoir “Settle for More” hits bookshelves. It’s positioned as a self-help guide, but will be notable for the insider details the Fox News anchor provides about her network.

In one passage, Ms. Kelly describes becoming violently ill after drinking a coffee her driver gave her as they headed to the first Republican presidential primary debate, which she moderated. Did someone try to poison her? Ms. Kelly doesn’t say. “She reports. You decide,” our reviewer writes.

• Rats are ticklish.

That’s the conclusion of researchers studying the importance of touch in forming social bonds.

The rats appeared to enjoy being in the lab. They made joyful leaps and emitted ultrasonic calls considered to be their equivalent of laughter.

• Recipe of the day.

Pork chops with apples make a great meal for a cold night, especially with a bottle of hard cider.

Back Story
On this day in 1918, World War I, one of the largest and deadliest wars in history, effectively ended.

Americans honor the occasion with Veterans Day. The U.S. initially celebrated Armistice Day, but in 1954 the name was changed to include all veterans.

Photo

Two-up, a gambling game that was popular among Australian soldiers during World War I. Credit Brook Mitchell/Getty Images
How do other countries commemorate their World War I troops?

In Britain and the Commonwealth of Nations, the bright red poppy is an enduring symbol, popularized by “In Flanders Fields,” once called “the perfect war poem” by The New York Times.

Canadians celebrate Remembrance Day, which once shared its date with Thanksgiving. To avoid having its veterans overshadowed by food, the government pushed the turkey and stuffing to October.

While most such events are solemn, Anzac Day in Australia, held in April, has a boisterous side. Revelers pack bars for the rare chance to legally play two-up, a gambling coin-flip game popular with soldiers from Australia and New Zealand.

Parades and memorials are held in parts of Britain’s former empire, including Kenya, South Africa and areas of India and the Caribbean, even as their World War I contributions are largely overlooked in accounts of the war.

But they are getting new attention. The British Library recently posted a trove of letters by Indian soldiers, including one with a poem.

Its author writes that his fellow soldiers would “Like tigers, spring upon the prey/And tear the German goat away.”

Des Shoe contributed reporting.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.

Continue reading the main story
TRENDING

Trump, Having Denounced Amazon’s Shipping Deal, Orders Review of Postal Service

Nonfiction: James Comey Has a Story to Tell. It’s Very Persuasive.

Comey’s Memoir Offers Visceral Details on a President ‘Untethered to Truth’

Trump Proposes Rejoining Trans-Pacific Partnership

Feature: Why America’s Black Mothers and Babies Are in a Life-or-Death Crisis

Modern Love: What Sleeping With Married Men Taught Me About Infidelity

Op-Ed Columnist: The Paul Ryan Story: From Flimflam to Fascism

Trump Plans to Pardon Scooter Libby in C.I.A. Leak Case

Tech Fix: I Downloaded the Information That Facebook Has on Me. Yikes.

Holocaust Is Fading From Memory, Survey Finds
View More Trending Stories »

What's Next
Loading...
Go to Home Page »
SITE INDEX THE NEW YORK TIMES
Site Index Navigation
NEWS
World
U.S.
Politics
N.Y.
Business
Tech
Science
Health
Sports
Education
Obituaries
Today's Paper
Corrections
OPINION
Today's Opinion
Op-Ed Columnists
Editorials
Op-Ed Contributors
Letters
Sunday Review
Video: Opinion
ARTS
Today's Arts
Art & Design
Books
Dance
Movies
Music
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Television
Theater
Video: Arts
LIVING
Automobiles
Crossword
Food
Education
Fashion & Style
Health
Jobs
Magazine
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Real Estate
T Magazine
Travel
Weddings & Celebrations
LISTINGS & MORE
Reader Center
Classifieds
Tools & Services
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Multimedia
Photography
Video
NYT Store
Times Journeys
Subscribe
Manage My Account
NYTCo
SUBSCRIBE
 Home Delivery
 Digital Subscriptions
 Crossword
Email Newsletters
Alerts
Gift Subscriptions
Group Subscriptions
Education Rate
Mobile Applications
Replica Edition
Site Information Navigation
© 2018 The New York Times Company HomeSearchAccessibility concerns? Email us at accessibility@nytimes.com. We would love to hear from you.Contact UsWork With UsAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite Information Navigation
Site MapHelpSite FeedbackSubscriptions Go to the next story
